Corinthians, chapter number one.
As you know, our theme for this year,
you see the banners behind me,
God's grace is sufficient.
And I am thankful for the grace of God.
And I'm thankful that God's grace is sufficient.
And the first message from this theme
was simply that God's grace is sufficient.
And then we're gonna study through the book
of second Corinthians here on Sunday mornings.
And last week we started chapter number one,
made it through verse number 11.
As we dealt with this subject,
with suffering comes comfort.
With suffering comes comfort.
And I'm thankful that our God is the God of all comfort.
The reality is that we all face times in life
with suffering and heartache and troubles and trials.
But to know that our God is the God of all comfort,
he comes alongside us, he encourages us,
he strengthens us and he enables us.
And what a blessing that is.
And I mentioned last week that in chapter one
in verse number one, that Paul begins by saying,
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God.
And I made this statement and it's just a,
it was part of the introduction and it really kind of flows
with the message this morning.
There were some troubles in Corinth with regard
to the authority and the apostleship of the apostle Paul.
And we find that he begins dealing with in verse number one
that he is an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God.
This was not something that he,
a title that he placed upon himself.
It was God's will for his life.
God called him, God equipped him and God was using him.
And we find that as we begin reading in verse number 12
and look at the subject matter for this morning,
we'll actually go through the second chapter,
the fourth verse, and we'll find that as we look
through this text of scripture,
that the apostle Paul continues to really address
the situation that was kind of an undercurrent issue
in Corinth, if you will.
And I've titled the message this,
when you are misunderstood.
I believe this morning that each of us
have experienced a misunderstanding.
There's been a time in your life,
there's been a time in my life,
as we have relationships one with another,
that we will experience the situation
of being misunderstood.
Maybe at some point you can think of in your mind,
even at this moment, that you were the one
that was misunderstood.
Or maybe you can think of a time in your life
where you were the one that misunderstood the other person.
And we find that the specific reason
for being misunderstood may be discovered.
It may be able for us to figure out
what led to the misunderstanding,
but the real goal is that the misunderstanding
can be cleared up.
And we find that as we look at this passage of scripture,
the Apostle Paul had given plans, he had plans,
and he had really communicated those plans
to the church in Corinth, to the believers there in Corinth,
with regard to his plans to come and visit them,
him go to visit them, and those plans changed.
You ever have plans change?
I mean, change of plans that are outside of your control.
Change of plans at the direction of the Lord.
Change of plans take place, and we find
that this change of plans of the Apostle Paul not going,
though he said he would go, this resulted
in Paul suffering attack and being criticized.
In fact, as we study through the portion of scripture,
you'll find that they were saying
that he was dealing with fleshly wisdom,
that he was really a double-minded man,
that he said yes, but he really meant no,
and he said no, but he really meant yes.
And I mean, this attack and criticism
was all as a result of this simple misunderstanding,
but we find as we look at the text of scripture
that Paul handled the situation,
number one, with humility, number two, with grace,
and number three, with maturity.
As I begin to look at this passage of scripture
and labor over the passage of scripture
of dealing with this on a Sunday morning
and preaching through the text,
I find that in this text that the Lord records for us
Paul addressing the matter, and notice this, head-on.
He deals with the matter head-on.
By the way, it's always good for us
when there's a misunderstanding to address it head-on,
to deal with the situation.
No doubt, the desire that Paul has
as you study through the passage of scripture
is to clear up the misunderstanding
and to restore unity amongst the brethren,
ultimately for the purpose of God being glorified.
We understand that the church in Corinth,
as we read the book of 1 Corinthians,
is already a church that is known or prone
to division, to carnality,
and we read those things in the first book
of 1 Corinthians, and we find that
through those particular aspects,
the Lord is not receiving the glory
that he ought to receive.
Why?
Because there's so much stuff that's going on
inside of the church with regard to internal conflict
that they're not really accomplishing
the goal that God has for the church externally.
And we find that ultimately,
the desire of the apostle Paul
is that the Lord Jesus Christ be magnified,
not only in his life,
but also in the lives of the believers there in Corinth.
And so I asked this question on the onset
of the message this morning,
how do you respond?
How do I respond when I'm misunderstood?
How do you respond when you're misunderstood?
Look at the passage with me.
We'll read just a few verses.
We'll go through all of it
as we dig through the passage this morning,
but look in verse number 12.
The Bible says this,
for our rejoicing is this,
the testimony of our conscience
that in simplicity and godly sincerity,
not with fleshly wisdom,
but by the grace of God,
we have had our conversation in the world
and more abundantly to you word.
For we write none other things unto you
than what you read or acknowledge,
and I trust you shall acknowledge even to the end,
as also you have acknowledged us in part
that we are your rejoicing,
even as ye also are ours in the day of the Lord Jesus.
And in this confidence,
I was minded to come unto you before
that you might have a second benefit
and to pass by you into Macedonia
and to come again out of Macedonia unto you
and of you to be brought on my way toward Judea.
That's where Paul's referencing again,
those travel plans.
And he mentioned in verse 16,
when I therefore verse 17 was thus minded,
did I use lightness or the things that I purposed,
do I purpose according to the flesh
that with me there should be yea, yea and nay, nay.
But as God is true,
our word toward you was not yea and nay.
For the son of God, Jesus Christ,
who was preached among you by us,
even by me and Silvanus and Timotheus,
was not yea and nay,
but in him was yea.
Notice verse 20,
for all the promises of God in him are yea,
and in him, amen,
unto the glory of God by us.
Now he would establish us with you in Christ
and hath anointed us is God,
who hath also sealed us
and given the earnest of the spirit in our hearts.
Moreover, notice in verse 22,
verse 23, excuse me,
moreover, I call God for a record upon my soul
that to spare you,
I came not as yet unto Corinth.
Not for that we have dominion over your faith,
but our helpers of your joy,
for by faith ye stand.
We'll look at the first four verses of chapter two
in just a moment.
I read this portion of scripture
so we'd kind of get the context of it.
But as we look at this and answer the question,
when you are misunderstood and how do we handle,
how do we respond?
I noticed, first of all,
as I study this passage of scripture,
first, if you're taking notes,
number one, Paul examines himself.
Paul examines himself.
I mentioned a moment ago by way of introduction
that the apostle Paul handled the situation
with humility, with grace, and with maturity.
And I believe that to be the case
because we see first that Paul examines himself.
It's absolutely imperative that we understand
not only what Paul did and how Paul dealt with this,
but that we understand the importance
of incorporating this principle in our lives.
Why do I say that?
Well, when you're misunderstood and when I'm misunderstood,
when we deal with misunderstandings in life,
your flesh desires to respond in a certain way.
Amen.
There are times in which your flesh desires
to defend yourself,
to defend against the misunderstanding.
There are times in which you may have the desire
to attack because of the misunderstanding
because guess what?
These people in Corinth,
they start attacking the apostle Paul.
They start criticizing the apostle Paul.
You said you were gonna come, but you didn't come.
And you're not a man that's trustworthy.
Your integrity is under question and your yea is nay
and your nay is yay and all of these things
and your flesh doesn't always want to respond properly
to that type of situation.
And so we begin to look at this text of scripture.
I believe that here,
the apostle Paul first examines himself
and it's an exemplary passage of scripture
for us to understand the importance
of incorporating that in our lives as well.
So what do we do when we're misunderstood?
Well, we should get alone with God,
get alone with God,
with the Lord and examine ourselves.
Examine the situation, examine ourselves.
Is there something that led to the misunderstanding, something that I did not do, something that
I am guilty of, the humility that is required?
I've often said, as we deal with the subject of the Lord's Supper, let a man examine himself.
The subject matter of self-examination is so important and it's one that often is neglected
by the people of God because it's not always exciting to examine yourself.
It requires humility, it requires honesty.
And we find here that Paul evidently went through this process of self-examination as
he understood what was coming, what was being communicated from Corinth and the stir that
was going on there.
He begins to examine himself and I find some conclusions that he reached as he went through
that process of self-examination.
This first one, as we mentioned in verse 12, we also see it in verse 23, I believe that
Paul concluded, number one, that his conscience was clear.
His conscience was clear, not only before the Lord, but also before the people of Corinth.
Notice what the Bible says in verse number 12, for our rejoicing is this.
Notice what he says, the testimony of our conscience that in simplicity and godly sincerity,
not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the
world and more abundantly to you word.
We find that the apostle Paul, as he went through this process after being misunderstood
in all the stir and all the criticism and all that was taking place, he examines himself
and he concludes that he had a conscience that was clear.
There was no conviction that he had as he got along with God that there was something
that he should have done or could have changed or had to make right.
No, he had a clear conscience.
In fact, in verse 23, he said, moreover, I call God for a record upon my soul that to
spare you, I came not as yet unto Corinth.
Hold your place here in the book of 2 Corinthians and turn to the book of Acts, if you will,
just for a moment.
I want you to look at Acts 23 and 24.
I want to note two verses of scripture that are so important as we begin to consider the
apostle Paul and how he lived his life and how he desired to have a conscience that was
a pure conscience.
We find that in Acts 23 and verse number one, notice what Paul says as he's standing here
and giving account here before the religious leaders, the Sanhedrin, the Bible says in
verse one of Acts 23, and Paul earnestly beholding the council said, men and brethren, I have
lived in all good conscience before God until this day.
That's a powerful statement that the apostle Paul is able to make as he stands before this
religious body and begins to give an account.
And he says that, that he's lived in all good conscience before God until this day.
But I want you to look forward in chapter 24 and verse number 16 of the book of Acts.
And I want you to see how Paul kind of expounds upon this thought with regard to his conscience.
And we see it in second Corinthians chapter one.
Now Paul is standing before Felix and he's giving a testimony before Felix and in Acts
24 and verse 16, notice what the Bible says.
And here in, do I exercise myself?
Then notice what he says.
To have, what's your Bible say, always.
To have always a conscience, notice, void of offense toward God and toward men.
He says that he's exercising, he's laboring, he's striving for this purpose to have always,
not occasionally, not most of the time, but to always have a conscience that is void of
offense.
But not only toward God, but notice toward men.
Toward men.
Well, it's okay that I'm not right with those people because I'm right with God.
Paul says that he exercised himself to have always a conscience void of offense toward
God and toward men.
By the way, if we're not right with one another, it's really a hard thing to be right with
God when we're holding offense in our hearts.
We need to get those things right so that we can be right with God.
And the reality this morning is that Paul says this was his desire.
This is what he was laboring and striving for.
And he mentions this to us in the book of Acts as he's giving his testimony before the
Sanhedrin and then before Felix and he's expressing that desire that he has.
And now as we come to 2 Corinthians chapter number one and we see, and I mentioned last
week that the Bible is not just a book of principle, it's a book of practice.
The Bible is not just a book of theory, it's a book of practice.
And we take the principles and we see them practically lived out in our lives.
And that's what Paul dealt with dealing with the comfort to begin the book of 2 Corinthians.
And now Paul deals with this, this issue between the believers in Corinth and his change
of plans causing this, this conflict.
And now how is he going to handle it?
How is he going to address it?
Well, he first examines himself.
And after going through that process, he says, I have a, a conscience that is clear.
Not only that, but I understand that as I look at the passage of scripture, according
to verse number 14, that Paul understood and he knew that he was accountable to the
Lord.
And 2 Corinthians chapter number one in verse number 14, notice what Paul says, as he also
have acknowledged us in part that we are your rejoicing, even as he also are ours.
Notice what he says in the day of the Lord Jesus, there's coming a day that Jesus is
coming back.
Amen.
Aren't you excited about that?
What a day it will be when my Jesus, I shall see hallelujah for the truth that Jesus is
coming back.
And the reality is that that truth, the biblical understanding of seeing my savior face to
face brings me great comfort and excitement and joy.
But the reality is that the Bible teaches that every child of God, every believer is
accountable to God.
And there is a Bema seat, the judgment seat of Christ, where we will stand before the
Lord.
And the reality is that the apostle Paul, as he goes through this process of examination,
he is reminded in his own heart and his own life, and he'll deal with this in other aspects
and other portions of scripture.
But he's understanding the very truth that every man must give an account.
And Paul's accountable.
And because of that, guess what Paul desires to be right with people.
He wants to be right with God, but he wants to be right with people.
And through this process of examination, Paul has in view eternity.
He's not simply thinking about the temporal issue.
He's understanding the eternal view, the long view, if you will.
See sometimes when we're misunderstood, we only consider the temporal thing.
We just, this isn't very comfortable having this misunderstanding.
It's not very comfortable when my spouse isn't happy with me or, or my parents not happy
with me.
Or I just want this thing to be resolved and whatever.
But Paul had this long view.
I'm accountable to God.
I'm going to stand before God.
And it's important for us to understand.
I find that Paul also, as he begins to share this truth with these believers, I believe
that he acknowledged the third thought here with regard to him examining himself, was
that he knew the character of God, amen, aren't you thankful that God has revealed to us in
his word, his character in his nature, but he also experienced that the character of
God impacted his own character.
So what is God's character?
Well verse 20, that all the promises of God in him are, are yay.
And in him, amen, under the glory of God by us.
By the way, someone noted that verse number 20, what a wonderful verse it is and how thankful
we are for the verse.
Had it not been for a misunderstanding in Corinth, we may not have this verse in our
Bibles.
And what a great truth that God reveals to us with regard to his character.
Listen, we stand on the promises of God, understanding that everything that God has promised will
come to fruition.
That God is a God who is faithful and God makes promises and God has the ability to
fulfill every promise that he makes.
To God be the glory.
And as the apostle Paul understood the character and the nature of God as a child of God, as
a Christian, Paul understood that God's character in nature was influencing and impacting his
character in nature.
In fact, as the apostle Paul would write, even in this book, if any man be in Christ,
he is a new creature.
Old things are passed away, behold, all things are become new.
In 2 Corinthians 5 and verse number 17, the things I used to do, I don't do them anymore.
We sing that song with the kids and we say this, there's been a great change since I've
been born again.
And the reality is that as a believer, I should handle a misunderstanding different than I
did as an unbeliever.
Amen.
We find that Paul
Paul was a man who had operated with integrity.
He was a man that understood the importance
of communicating effectively.
He said this in verse number 19,
well in verse 18,
but as God is true,
our word toward you was not yea and nay.
See, Paul says I was the minister of the Lord Jesus Christ.
And when I came to you,
I wasn't coming to you
as some of these false teachers would come
and I'm not coming to rule over
to have dominion over you as he mentions in verse 24.
No, I'm coming to impart truth to you.
I'm coming to point you to Jesus.
I'm coming so that you might be complete in Christ
so that you might have your joy complete and be full.
He says in verse 24,
that we're helpers of your joy.
So as Paul is coming to these believers in Corinth
and as Paul would communicate
with these believers in Corinth,
he understands that he was communicating
on the behalf of God.
Notice in verse 19,
for the son of God, Jesus Christ,
and then notice this parenthetical,
who was preached among you by us.
Paul was preaching the Lord Jesus Christ.
I mean, listen,
if he's preaching about the truth of the gospel
and he's preaching about salvation by grace
through faith alone,
and that the only way to be saved is by the blood of Christ,
he understands that he must operate with integrity.
Because if he's not a man of integrity and character,
then his message behind a pulpit is also under question.
Does that make sense?
And we find that the apostle Paul,
he's examined himself.
Let me very briefly look over at 1 Corinthians 16.
It might just be a page or two over for you in your Bibles,
but I wanna mention what Paul said
and really understanding the importance of what Paul said,
even as he concluded the first letter
to the church in Corinth.
In 1 Corinthians 16, in verse number five,
notice the Bible says this.
Now, I will come unto you
when I shall pass through Macedonia,
for I do pass through Macedonia.
And it may be that I will abide, yea,
and winter with you,
that you may bring me on my journey withersoever I go.
Verse seven, for I will not see you now by the way,
but I trust to tarry a while with you.
What are those next words?
If the Lord permit.
Is that what your Bible says?
By the way, I'm pretty confident that Paul was happy
that he said, if the Lord permit,
because there are times in our lives
and we can learn a great lesson from this
and we'll circle back to it
at the end of the message this morning,
coupled with a truth from the book of James.
But the reality is that I must live my life,
yes, with integrity,
but understanding if the Lord permit.
And so Paul examines himself.
I believe it's a crucial step in the whole process
of how we deal with, how we respond
when we are misunderstood.
If you're sitting here this morning and say,
I've never been misunderstood,
we need to have you teach a lesson, amen.
Because the reality is I believe this morning
that each of us could stand and say,
yes, there've been times that I've been misunderstood.
Maybe right now you're in the midst
of I'm misunderstood at the moment,
like I'm dealing with something.
But how do we respond to it?
What do we do?
Because it's not as important for us to come to
and to find out the specific reason
for the misunderstanding, though that is an objective.
The most important thing is that the misunderstanding
can be cleared up so that God might be glorified.
So that there could be unity once again.
So we find first of all that Paul, he examines himself.
Number two, Paul explains himself.
Paul explains himself.
Let me say this,
explanation without examination can cause you trouble.
Did you get it?
Explanation without examination can cause you trouble.
Why?
Because you just start explaining yourself
and you start attacking and you start defending
and you've not examined yourself.
I believe that it's absolutely important
that we understand this process
and that the examination precedes the explanation.
Paul is able to say that he has,
as he speaks about this testimony of his conscience
to begin the whole section in verse number 12,
it's because he stepped back and he's examined himself,
but now he's gonna explain himself.
Now understand this, the truth with me this morning,
you will never convince everyone.
There may be a misunderstanding
that you will never be able to fully reconcile with someone
simply because they don't want to
or whatever circumstances that are outside of your control.
And so we understand that.
However, the apostle Paul provides an explanation
so that the believers here in Corinth
would understand the way that the plans change
and they would understand that he was not a man
that was lacking integrity.
He was not a man who was saying one thing
while he meant something else.
He's writing one thing while he really means something else.
He's not a double-minded man.
And so he seeks to provide explanation.
Notice with me, I find first of all,
that he gives explanation with regard to his character,
to his character.
We mentioned already in verse 12
where he talks about this pure conscience,
a testimony of our conscience,
that in simplicity and godly sincerity.
Notice where he says, not with fleshly wisdom,
but by the grace of God,
we have had our conversation in the world.
Notice where he says, and more abundantly to you, word.
You know that Paul was under the microscope, so to speak,
when he ministered in Corinth for a lengthy period of time.
And so what does Paul appeal to?
Paul appeals to his testimony, his character.
Paul appeals to his time
in which he ministered there in Corinth.
And he says, look, you know, yes, I've lived in the world.
I've lived in various places,
and God's led me to minister in a variety of places,
but understand that I was with you.
You saw my character.
Remember what he said to Timothy.
We've finished in 2 Timothy last year
as we studied through 1 and 2 Timothy,
but I'm reminded of what Paul says
in 2 Timothy chapter three in verse number 10,
when he says to Timothy,
he's speaking about the apostasy and the false teachers
and all the things that are going on
and the perilous times in the last days
and all the characteristics of those false teachers
and what have you.
And he says in verse 10 of 2 Timothy chapter three,
but thou has fully known my doctrine,
manner of life, purpose, faith,
long suffering, charity, patience,
persecutions, afflictions,
which came unto me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra,
what persecutions I endured,
but out of them all the Lord delivered me.
What does Paul say?
You fully know.
I've been ministering.
I've been serving.
You've known my life.
We find that as Paul is writing to the church in Philippi,
he says to them in Philippians chapter number four
in verse number nine,
as you note that verse of scripture,
he says to these believers in Philippi,
those things which you have both learned
and received and heard and seen in me do.
The God of peace shall be with you.
So what's Paul saying?
These people that God allowed the apostle Paul
to minister to, they saw his life.
They saw his character.
And so now there's this misunderstanding.
And if you've ever been misunderstood,
you understand how it can hurt
when you're misunderstood.
You can be attacked because of being misunderstood.
And Paul says, my character is being questioned,
but you've known my character.
Notice what he says in verse 17.
He says, when I therefore was thus minded,
notice what he says, did I use lightness?
In other words, was I being fickle?
Did I say, I'm just gonna come visit you
because that's what you wanted to hear?
Because you wanted me to come.
So therefore, I just used this lightness
and said, oh yeah, I'm gonna come and visit with you.
The reality is that Paul wasn't using lightness.
He was being sincere in his communication.
You ever have somebody say to you,
hey, if you need anything, call me.
But you really know they don't want you to call them?
They're just saying it because they think
it's the right thing to say.
Have you ever felt that way?
I mean, honestly, I felt that way at times.
But the reality is that I know I've said to some people,
even this week, because of some circumstances
that they faced, I've said to them,
hey listen, if you need anything, please give me a call.
Please let me know.
You know what the responses have been
from those three individuals that I can think of
right off the top of my head
that I've said that to this week?
They said, pastor, you'll be the first person I call
if I need anything.
And I appreciate that.
I thank the Lord for that, why?
Because I truly mean, if you need anything, let me know.
How can I help you?
We had some snow last week.
We have some widows in our church.
They don't need to be shoveling snow, amen?
Hallelujah, they don't need to be shoveling snow.
I'm old too, I shouldn't, I'm just teasing.
But the reality is that we wanna be able
to help folks if we need to.
Paul's saying, I didn't use lightness.
I didn't just say this to make you feel good.
I was being sincere.
Notice.
Notice in verse 17, he continues or says this,
or the things that I purpose,
do I purpose according to the flesh?
That with me there should be yay, yay, and nay, nay.
So in other words, he's saying, listen,
you're attacking me and you're criticizing me and saying,
you know, he doesn't pray about anything.
He's just operating in the flesh.
No, Paul says that's not the case.
It's not the case.
The change was not a result of negligence.
The change in plans was not a result of laziness.
We find that the Apostle Paul,
his yes was yes and his no was no.
He was a man of integrity, but his plans changed.
By the way, he said, if the Lord permit.
There was some change of plans.
So he first in his explanation mentions his character,
but number two, he mentions his concern.
Notice with me in verse 23,
he says, moreover, I call God for a record upon my soul.
Notice where he says that to spare you,
I came not as yet unto Corinth.
What does Paul mean when he says to spare you?
I came not as yet to Corinth.
Well, Paul understood as we get into the second chapter,
we'll mention it, we'll see it clearly.
Paul understood that he had this concern
for the believers in Corinth,
but there were some really weighty things
that had to be dealt with in the book of 1 Corinthians.
There was open sin that was not even mentioned
amongst the Gentiles that was taking place
that Paul deals with in 1 Corinthians chapter number five,
and it was a heavy, heavy situation.
And so Paul, he has this concern
for the believers in Corinth,
and he didn't wanna come to them with heaviness
and cause them more sorrow.
In other words, I believe that he wanted them
as we see in verse number 24.
Notice where he says,
not for that we have dominion over your faith.
He's not coming in as a dictator
and having this dominion over them.
No, he says that even though I'm an apostle,
that's not my position.
I am a helper of your joy, for by faith ye stand.
By the way, I'm thankful that the Bible teaches
that every child of God is a priest before the Lord.
You can go to God, you have direct access
to the throne room of heaven,
and what a joy to understand
that if you're saved by the grace of God,
if you have assurance this morning
that your sin has been forgiven
and that heaven is your home,
and the only way to have that done
is through the blood of the Lord Jesus Christ,
then you have direct access with God.
And Paul says that I'm a helper of your joy,
but we find that he says that to spare you,
I came not as yet unto Corinth.
It wasn't that he had no plan to go to Corinth,
even in the future, but he says as yet.
The timing wasn't right.
There needed to be some more time, some more space.
There needed to be some more response.
He needed to understand, and we mentioned in verse number one
how that he mentions about Timothy, our brother,
and it's understood or believed
that he had sent Timothy to find out,
even as he did in Thessalonica,
how things were going, and he finds this report,
and so Paul was giving some space, if you will.
Notice as we enter into the first verses
of chapter number two, he says in verse number one,
as he continues the thought of that to spare you,
I came not as yet unto Corinth.
In verse number one, he says,
but I determined this with myself,
that I would not come again to you in heaviness.
That I would not come to you again in heaviness.
Notice, for if I make you sorry,
who is he then that maketh me glad,
but the same which is made sorry by me?
And I wrote this same unto you,
lest when I came, I should have sorrow from them
of whom I ought to rejoice,
having confidence in you all,
that my joy is the joy of you all.
What is he saying?
He's saying, well, if I come to you,
and we're supposed to be rejoicing together
as brothers and sisters in Christ,
and yet I come with more heaviness
than I've made you sorrowful,
and we're not going to be rejoicing as we ought to rejoice,
so therefore, I did not come,
to spare you, I came not as yet unto Corinth.
Why?
So that you could respond the way
that you should respond appropriately,
and then I would be able to come,
and we could rejoice together.
And so Paul, as he provides this explanation
to these believers in Corinth,
he first mentions his character.
He then mentions his concern
for these believers here in Corinth,
and his concern that they would grow,
that they would not become more sorrowful
because of a heavy visit.
But then we find this,
in verse number four of chapter two,
as Paul provides explanation,
not only does he reference his character, his concern,
but number three, he mentions his charity.
Notice what he says in verse number four.
"'For out of much affliction and anguish of heart,
"'I wrote unto you with many tears,
"'not that you should be grieved,
"'but that you might know the love
"'which I have more abundantly unto you.'"
You know, Paul loved the people
that God called him to minister to.
Paul taught the various churches
and the believers about the importance of love,
and loving one another,
and growing in their love one toward another.
We find that he taught that because of the influence
of the teaching of the Lord Jesus Christ,
where Jesus taught in John 13,
a new commandment,
"'Give I unto you that you love one another
"'as I have loved you.
"'By this, by your love one for another,
"'shall all men know that ye are my disciples.'"
And we find that the apostle Paul,
he loved these people in Corinth,
and he expresses his charity to them.
He expresses, notice,
he says, "'Out of much affliction
"'and anguish of heart I wrote to you,'
but then he says this,
"'with many tears.'"
The matter by which Paul was addressing
with this church in Corinth was a heavy matter.
It was a difficult thing,
and Paul was not using lightness.
Paul was not just firing off a letter to them
and condemning.
No, he wrote this with many tears.
He was broken over the situation.
He desired that they would receive the truth
and respond appropriately.
Why?
Because Paul knew that not only would he stand before Christ
but they too would stand before Christ.
So Paul, as he's referring to these
or responding to these accusations
and as he's explaining himself,
he says that, "'I wrote this with much affliction
"'and anguish of heart,
"'and I wrote with many tears.'"
And then notice the end of verse number four,
"'Not that ye should be grieved,
"'but that ye might know the love
"'which I have more abundantly unto you.'"
Why do we, why did Paul make the decisions that he made?
Why did he write what he wrote?
Why did he change his plans
the way that he changed his plans?
Because he had concern,
but he also had charity,
had love for these people in Corinth.
He loved them.
And because he loved them,
he wanted to see them complete in Christ.
He wanted to see them respond appropriately.
Notice, if you will, in the book of Colossians
in chapter number one,
I want you to notice what Paul says here.
There's a great important truth to understand
between Paul writing to the believers in 2 Corinthians
and Paul writing to the believers in Colossae.
When Paul is writing to the believers in 2 Corinthians,
Paul is writing to people that he knew personally.
Paul is writing to people that he ministered to personally.
Paul is writing to people that he knew their names.
He was acquainted with them.
He knew their families.
He knew some of the things they struggled with.
He ministered there for a decent amount of time.
But now as he's writing to the believers in Colossae,
Paul didn't know these people personally.
Paul simply heard about their faith.
He heard, he'd received report.
As you look in the first part of chapter number one,
you find that Epaphras had brought this report
and told them, the Apostle Paul,
about the faith of these people in Colossae
and it caused Paul to rejoice greatly.
There's some people that got saved over there in Colossae.
They were lost. They were sinners as we all were.
At one point in our lives, we're lost and undone,
but the gospel came forth and they received the gospel.
They received the truth that Jesus is the only savior,
that yes, I'm a sinner and he's the only savior
and I need to trust him.
His finished work at Calvary, his death, his burial
and his resurrection so that I can be saved
and Paul's rejoicing in that.
He's thankful that these people are saved.
But he says to them at the end of the chapter,
chapter one of Colossians one here,
notice in verse 28, notice what he says.
Whom we preach, warning every man
and teaching every man in all wisdom
that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.
To be complete in Christ.
He speaks about in the second chapter
about the fact that you're complete in him.
And Paul says, spiritually speaking, my goal,
my desire for you, these people in Colossae,
why do I do the things that I do?
Because I want you to be able to stand complete before Christ.
I want you to be established.
and I want you to be able to stand and give a good
testimony before the Lord Jesus Christ.
So as we go back to 2 Corinthians chapter two,
and we begin to understand the Apostle Paul writing
to these believers in Corinth and helping to deal with
and address this misunderstanding,
he's explaining himself and he says,
I want you to know how much I love you.
It's very interesting because it's in this same book
in 2 Corinthians chapter 12 and verse 15,
where Paul says, and I will very gladly spend
and be spent for you, though the more abundantly
I love you, the less I be loved.
And here we find that the Apostle Paul,
as he's writing to these believers in Corinth,
he says, as he explains himself, remember my character,
but I want you to know how concerned I was for you.
I wasn't concerned about me as much as I was concerned
about you and my charity, my love for you.
As we looked earlier in 1 Corinthians chapter 16,
we find that Paul originally said, if the Lord permit.
I believe that those few words, those four simple words,
if the Lord permit, that that should have helped
to prevent a misunderstanding.
But you know, as much as you might try to do
to prevent a misunderstanding, you can't keep
a misunderstanding from taking place.
As adequately as you think you've communicated,
as effective as a communicator as you think you might be,
there are times that you will still be misunderstood.
So what do we do?
How do we respond when we're misunderstood?
This is practical Christian living right here.
This is Paul sharing with us a testimony,
a personal testimony of him being misunderstood
and how he responded.
And I'm thankful that God put it in the Bible.
Because we have an example this morning before us
of an individual that responded with humility
and grace and maturity.
And when you're misunderstood and when I'm misunderstood
and when that next time comes, and it may be today,
it may be tomorrow, I don't know, you don't know,
but when you're misunderstood,
how are you gonna respond to it?
And I would say that as we look at this portion
of Scripture that it first must begin with examination.
Examine yourself.
Take that step back.
Helps to diffuse the whole situation anyway.
And examine yourself and ensure that you have
that same level of a pure conscience
that Paul was able to write about,
that he's able to say,
I call God for a record upon my soul.
That's powerful.
Paul says, I operate with integrity.
I'm examining myself.
I'm gonna stand before Christ.
I'm accountable to him and he's impacted the way
that I live and as I examine myself,
I come to the conclusion that I have this testimony
of our conscience, I can rejoice, as Paul says.
And then, and maybe I should say only then,
after the examination, then the explanation.
Can I explain myself?
I'm sorry we had this misunderstanding
and I really wanna clear this up
and I think it'd be good for us to be able
to have this conversation as Paul begins to explain himself.
I find that as you look and it doesn't end,
there's several more issues that Paul will deal with
with regard to the ministry throughout the next couple
of chapters here in the book of 2 Corinthians.
But Paul, he loves these people in Corinth
and he knows that they're gonna stand before Christ
and he says, I wanna clear this up.
Why?
Because I want God to be glorified.
I want God to be glorified because if there's division
and there's contention because of a misunderstanding
and all of this internal focus,
then we're not doing what God's called us to do
and God's not being glorified.
So this morning, when you're misunderstood,
how do you respond?
What do you do?
Start with examination and then explanation.
Let's pray together.
Father, we love you.
We thank you for loving us.
We thank you for your word, the truth contained therein.
Lord, I thank you for the portion of scripture
though it's important for us to understand
the historical context we gain from it,
application for our own lives.
Everyone with the sound of my voice today
has experienced a misunderstanding.
God, I pray that you would help us to act and think,
respond biblically.
Father, I pray that if there's one present
that's not sure of heaven,
though the message this morning
wasn't specifically on the gospel,
we understand that all have sinned
and come short of the glory of God.
The wages of sin is death,
but the gift of God is eternal life
through Jesus Christ, our Lord.
But God commendeth his love toward us
and that while we're yet sinners, Christ died for us.
As it is appointed unto man once to die,
but after this, the judgment for whosoever
shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.
Lord, if there's one here this morning
that's not sure of heaven,
if they were to die today,
they do not have 100% confidence that heaven is their home.
I pray the Holy Spirit of God would work
and move in their hearts and lives.
They'd come to this old fashioned altar
and allow us to take a Bible
and show them how they could know for sure
that heaven is their home.
I pray for every child of God.
Would you help us as new creatures,
as saved individuals to deal with misunderstandings
godly and appropriately,
with humility and with grace and with maturity.
We pray that you'd move and work as only you can
for it's in Christ's name we pray.
Would you stand?